Improves Threat Model (#10)
apache/logging-site: _threat-model-common.adoc

////

[#threat-common]
= Common threat model

All the logging frameworks maintained by Apache Logging Services (https://logging.apache.org/log4cxx/index.html[Log4cxx],
https://logging.apache.org/log4j/index.html[Log4j]
and
https://logging.apache.org/log4net/index.html[Log4net]) face similar challenges from malicious actors.
The following sections contain the most common threats that a logging framework faces and the assumptions on the origin of various trusted data.

> Vulnerability reports that don't follow those assumptions will not be accepted and are **not** eligible for our
> https://yeswehack.com/programs/log4j-bug-bounty-program[Bug Bounty Program].

Reviewer: I'm a little be reluctant to say **our** BB program:

```suggestion
Vulnerability reports that don't follow those assumptions will not be accepted and are **not** eligible for 
https://yeswehack.com/programs/log4j-bug-bounty-program[YesWeHack Bug Bounty Program].
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/10/commits/6423e0f077333c2a5ca0859de03860db7b06adeb

[#threat-common-users]
== User types

Apache Logging Services distinguishes two kinds of users:

Trusted Users::
+
Application developers and administrators are considered **trusted** users.

> They have unrestricted access to all the features of the logging framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have unrestricted access to all the features of the logging framework and the environment it is deployed to.
```

Untrusted Users::
+
All the other users are considered untrusted.

> [#threat-common-assets]

Reviewer: Did you mean `sources`?

```suggestion
[#threat-common-sources]
```

== Data sources

Logging systems read data from multiple sources that are controlled by both trusted and untrusted users:

Trusted Sources::
+
* Log4cxx, Log4j and Log4net **trust** environment variables, configuration properties, and configuration files.
To keep them secure:
** It is up to the deployer to ensure that untrusted parties do not have write access to these resources.
** It is up to the deployer to ensure that these resources are transmitted through a confidential channel.

> ** Non-confidential channels such as HTTP or JMX are disabled by **default** to prevent their unintentional usage.

Reviewer: Are we sure everything related with HTTP is disabled across Log4j, Log4net, and Log4cxx by default?

Author: For Log4j, `http` is not enabled by default for retrieving configuration files. Only `file`, `jar`, and `https` are allowed by default via the [`log4j2.configurationAllowedProtocols`](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/systemproperties.html#log4j2.configurationAllowedProtocols) system property. Additionally, the classpath and files may be used without restrictions if Log4j’s native auto-configuration is applied.

Note: Spring Boot actually enforces this property even for the classpath and files either intentionally or, more likely, unintentionally.

> ** If configuration files use interpolation features such as
> https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/lookups.html[lookups], it is up to the deployer to ensure that only lookups from trusted sources are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** If configuration files use interpolation features (e.g., https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/lookups.html[Log4j Lookups]), it is up to the deployer to ensure that only trusted sources are read.
```

> It is up to the programmer to document thread context keys that can be considered as trusted.

Reviewer: This sentence is a little bit dangling. Do we need to briefly explain thread context keys? Isn't it over-specialized to mention it here?

Author: I expanded the description in https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/10/commits/3ed059dd81af823ce70b459b65eb5c9bdf2f74bd

Administrators should be aware that programmers have been using the thread context so store various user-provided data, like HTTP headers. As such using `${ctx:...}` is not necessarily safe.

* The logging frameworks **trust** that the objects passed to the log statements can be safely converted to strings:
** These frameworks should not be used to log deserialized data from untrusted sources.
See https://owasp.org/www-community/vulnerabilities/Deserialization_of_untrusted_data[the related OWASP guide] for details.

* If parameterized logging is used, the format string is **trusted**:

> ** Programmers **should** use compile time constants as format strings to prevent attackers from mangling messages.

Reviewer: I'm not a native English speaker, but I'd replace `mangling` with `tampering`. (I might very well be wrong.)

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/apache/logging-site/pull/10/commits/6e96289d75abf0e6545e580d5c5004c6dffa6b35
